I lost my dad to cancer this morning. Thankfully, it was not a surprise. He was diagnosed a year ago and went through several rounds of chemo and radiation. It sort of worked for a while. But just before Christmas, we found out the cancer had spread to his brain. A few weeks ago, he stopped doing chemo because it wasn't working. On Father's Day (just 5 days ago), my mom called and let me talk to him for the last time. It was hard for him to talk. I couldn't understand him, and I'm not sure if he understod me. My mom translated for us, though. We both said "I love you" -- something neither of us had said to each other in years. His health declined rapidly after that. This morning, my mom called to tell me he had died.

I'm still processing it. I think I'll be processing it for the rest of my life. This post is part of the processing.

We can't control the world. Sometimes people die, and it's beyond our control. In cases like these, the only thing that's (somewhat) in our control is how we react. To some degree, we control how we allow ourselves to be changed by the death of a loved one. And to some degree, we can control how we "frame" their death -- i.e. we control the story we tell ourselves about what the death means. In other words: We can't control grief; but we can control the grieving process.

Take Alice and Bob. They do not know each other. Both of them have just lost their father to cancer. Neither of them have lost a family member before. Neither is particularly religious. Both are experiencing the typical symptoms of early-stage grief: they are overwhelmed by sadness, they feel detatched from the world, their thoughts are foggy. They struggle with questions like "Why did this happen to him?" and "What does this mean about life?"

Fast forward a few weeks, though, and there are differences. Bob has begun to drink every night. He has put on several pounds. To him, his father's death symbolizes the meaninglessness of life. We live, then we die, and it's all pointless.

Alice, on the other hand, has joined a gym. She has stopped drinking and begun cooking healthier meals. To her, her father's death is a wakeup call -- a reminder that our time on earth is short. She knows that she could die at any time. She thinks about it daily. But she believes that if there's even a small chance that she can extend her life or improve her life's quality, then she wants to take it.

I honestly don't know which of these will be me. I'm hoping I'll be more like Alice. That's sort of what this post is about.


----


The day my dad died, I wrote a post on this blog. It was my way of coping. I wrote about how his death made me question where I was going to end up: spiraling into depression, or managing to survive and grow stronger.

Now, almost 7 months later, I feel like it's time for a Part 2 post -- sort of an update of where I think I'm ending up.

I'm happy to say that I've been working hard to make grief and mourning into a catalyst for positive change:

I stopped drinking last summer. I still remember the last drink I took. This was about a month after my dad died. It was a sip of rum at around 3 or 4pm. There weren't any mixers in the fridge, so I had it on the rocks. It burned my throat. I remember thinking, "What am I doing? My dad and grandfather both died from esophageal cancer, and I can literally feel this stuff tearing up my throat." After almost a decade of daily drinking (and about a month of heavy, depression-induced drinking), I set the bottle aside and haven't had a sip of alcohol since. I keep the half-empty bottle in my shower next to my shampoo as a reminder.
I joined a gym. Not drinking at night makes it a lot easier to wake up in the morning and work out before going to the office. I've been lifting weights and doing cardio pretty much every day for the last few months.
I've lost about 10 pounds. This is just a natural effect of the above two items. I feel healthy. And most of the time, I feel happy. I do still get sad when stuff reminds me of my dad, but I have enough positive stuff going on in my life that I'm not getting pulled down by the sadness. It passes.
Anyway, I guess this Part 2 post is a restatement of what I was pondering in Part 1:

We don't always get to choose our feelings. But we do (sometimes) get to choose how our feelings affect us.
